+++
title = "Not far on the Highway One"
Tags = ["California"]
date = 2019-10-20T21:48:21-07:00
+++
On a muggy San Francisco morning we — me and Aditi, set out south on Highway
One without a real plan.


When we made it to the Taco Bell Cantina, we saw at least a hundred surfers all
clad in their black rubber tuxedos trying to stand up on the waves. Aditi asked
me how it was a good idea to be in the water in such cold weather?


An old man  was getting ready to go fishing. He assembled his pole, pulled some
fishing line through it and started fiddling around with bait to attach. I
joked about the American hobby culture. Everyone buys so much stuff to pursue a
hobby. For fishing one has to buy an icebox, a rod, some bait, waterproof
clothes, boots and a chair. For surfing one probably owns two wetsuits, a
surfboard and a huge garage to store all that. I guess that is the California
hobby dream.


We stopped next at the Devil's Slide trail. The trail was basically an old
piece of the old Highway One replaced by a nearby tunnel. The “slide” is
actually caused by the sea floor pushing up against the nearby Montara
mountain. The trail was basically ancient seabed. We could see the layers of
brittle rock. We could break it with our hands.


A signpost told us the story of how an oil spill caused by the Shell oil
company destroyed a colony of murres (birds) on a rock nearby. The company paid
7million dollars that was used to rehabilitate the birds on the rock.
Scientists used sounds to attract birds to the rock, and a colony took hold. As
of 2019, there are thousands of birds on the rock. I was proud of the human
ingenuity.


Next up we went to the old British pub called Cameroons in Half Moon bay. This
place had a rich history, it was a “ladies house” and a prohibition era
bootlegging centre. Now it is a kitschy British pub a continent away from
Britain. A double decker bus and a telephone booth outside set the mood. Inside
there were British war posters and photos of Churchill. Their Fish chips were
really good to boot.


On the way back we ran into the traffic from the Half Moon Bay pumpkin
festival. They measured states largest pumpkin there at 2100 pounds. To avoid
the hordes , we drove through a winding road that followed a creek. That put us
in the middle of sky blocking redwood grove. The fog seemed trapped there for
eons. We got out of the car and took in the mist.


I am grateful for California and how far I can go within one hour where I live.

